# Cleaning bulk RNA-seq cancer expression data

## Goals

The purpose of this project is to provide ground work for developing more
advanced methods for determining the exclusive expression profile of cancer
cells in bulk RNA-seq data.

Bulk sequencing data is relatively abundant, and therefore a good resource for
developing machine learning models for diagnosis and treatment development in
cancer research [citation needed]. However bulk samples obtained from tumors are
not guaranteed to contain purely cancer cells, rendering the expression profiles
obtained from whole bulk RNA-sequencing of the samples inaccurate for the
expression profile of cancer cells themselves. A method reliably quantifying and
reducing the inaccurracy would therefore accelerate method development of
machine learning methods in cancer research by unlocking the potential of cancer
bulk RNA-seq data as training material.

The methods are currently tested using pseudobulk data obtained by sampling UMI
single-cell RNA-seq data to obtain bulk RNA-seq data with known celltype
abundances and celltype expression profiles.

## Current status

We have working pseudobulk generation & deconvolution using non-negative least
squares. Signature matrices are generated by identifying differentially
expressed (and therefore informative) genes using
[DESeq2](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html), and
using them to construct the signature matrix.

Fine tuning is needed in selecting the marker genes for the signature matrix.

## Roles

- **main driver**: Jonas Freimuth
- **supervision**: Altuna Akalin

## Presentations & reports

Project folder on
[google drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Frjcame2IfcXbOmZiAKvL6Pxm2Voh6dn?usp=share_link).

Current project description as
[google slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1u1LPAYZJsJB9ybl-eJYHB3b0nZ1O_IZFpfnkWjXt-a8/edit?usp=sharing).

## Experiments & failed ideas

No link yet.

## Draft paper

*Non-existent*

## Prerequisite reading

- Data source: Wu, S.Z., Al-Eryani, G., Roden, D.L. et al. A single-cell and
spatially resolved atlas of human breast cancers. Nat Genet 53, 1334–1347
(2021). <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-021-00911-1>

## Prerequisite skills

- Intermediate R & tidyverse skills
- Knowledge of bulk & single-cell RNA sequencing downstream analysis
- Understanding of linear deconvolution methods
